# Price-effects-of-COVID-19-lockdowns-on-food-in-India-Difference-in-Difference-analysis-
## Background information
COVID-19 has affected every country in the world, killing over 6 million people by April 2022. However, apart from the direct health impact of COVID-19, the indirect effects of the disease such as the price effects of the pandemic need to be investigated as well. Since March 2020, multiple countries adopted varying strictness of lockdown, travel bans, and social distancing to limit the spread of the disease. The mobility restrictions especially hampered the food supply chain and undermined food security around the world. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 88 to 115 million people were placed into extreme poverty due to the lockdowns. The number of people suffering from food insecurity has increased by 27.8 percent, and the global food price increased by 9 percent. Especially in the developing countries, lack of supply and increased transaction costs caused further disruptions in logistics. Non-availability of laborers across the supply chain led the retail food prices to skyrocket. In sixteen developing countries, 94 percent of food supply chains faced reduced access to inputs declined sales after the COVID-19. For example, Nigeria, a country that imports the majority of its staple foods like rice and wheat, experienced a rapid increase in food prices because the lockdown policies affected the international food trade.
## Literature review
The goal of this analysis is to analyze the effect of COVID-19 lockdown policies on food prices. The COVID-19 outbreak has induced restrictions that affected both the supply and demand of food commodities; however, the literature on the price effects of COVID-19 is still inconclusive. Varshney noted that since consumers could not leave their homes for shopping and the hotels and restaurants were closed, decreased demand resulted in lower food prices, while Vercammen posit that COVID-19 induced social panic led consumers to panic-buying and increased food prices.
To analyze the relationship between COVID-19 and food prices, Paulo Farias used Principal Component Analysis (PCA) Biplot. They conclude that price fluctuation for perishable food such as fruits and vegetables was high for the districts in Brazil that were highly affected by COVID-19. However, Ruan suggest that the empirical analysis of Paulo Farias is limited due to the small sample sizes. 
In contrast, the work of Ruan uses the time-regression discontinuity design method to examine the effect of the lockdown policy in China on Chinese cabbage prices and found that the lockdown measure has increased vegetable price in China by 36.5 percent to 50 percent depends on region. However, the shortcoming of this method is that it only elucidates an immediate surge in price and fails to explain the effects of lockdowns on food prices over time. 

Acknowledging the limitations of other empirical analysis methods, this analysis uses Difference-in-Difference (DiD) analysis to explore the relationship between lockdown and food prices over time.
Akter also used difference-in-difference regression to examine the effect of mobility restrictions on food prices; using the European Union’s Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) and the Stay-at-Home Restriction Index (SHRI), the paper revealed that an increase in the level of stay-at-home restrictions increases overall food prices by 1 percent. Also, the paper noted that the effect of lockdown varies depending on the type of food commodities\footnote{While perishable food commodities like meat, fish & seafood, and vegetables showed high increases in prices, the prices of non-perishable food categories (bread, cereals, cheese, eggs, and oils) remained unaffected.}. However, the work is focused on 31 European countries and does not consider the price effect of lockdowns on developing countries with insufficient food storage capacities and vulnerable supply-chains. Moreover, the literature accounts for the price effects of COVID-19 on a national level and does not show its effects on a district level. 

In this context, this paper complements the literature on COVID-19 lockdown policies on food prices in several ways. First, the paper uses the data set of India to understand the effect of COVID-19 on countries with a lack of cold storage facilities. Second, the paper uses district-level data set to explore the effect of COVID-19 on a micro level(districts-level). Lastly, this paper assesses whether the different severity of lockdown policies have a varying effect on food prices.  
